--
title: Why being a grad student is different than being an undergrad.
tags: grad,life,umd,undergrads
--

Classes started today at the University of Maryland.  There are now a
bunch of undergrads back on campus, and grad students either TAing
their classes, working on constructive research, or pretending to be
knowledgeable about the graduate student experience and writing about
it.  Over the past few semesters I've accumulated a bit of the view of
graduate student experience, though it's surely still not unique
(notably, UMD's computer science department seems to suck a lot less
than other departments on campus).  So I thought I would write about
what makes being a grad student *different* than being an
undergraduate.  I'll remove the social aspects (being a grad student
puts you in an awkward position of being not really in the actual
world, making no money, and having little hope for doing so for a
number of years) and focus on the aspects pertaining strictly to
education.

For full disclosure, I don't really think there's anything too
groundbreaking to be said here, no secret magic charm, mostly the same
old.  The highlevel claim is basically this:

> Being a good undergrad is about *learning* (and reciting) good
> stories.  Being a good grad student is about *telling* good stories.

What are some stories?

  - How does a cell grow and divide to create organisms?

  - Why can't we tell whether an arbitrary terminates or not?

  - How can we model the electrical voltage in a wire as a function of
    time?
  
As an undergrad, your basic job is to go to class, read about these
things in a book, do some homework exercises, and try to piece
together the story in a way that makes sense to you (compile it into
your brain), and then prove in some way to your instructor that you
know the story.  Generally these stories are very good; this is what
really draws people to go to grad school: they want to *tell* good
stories.  Most undergrads won't care about these stories (a quick
glance at any office hours session will consist mostly of students who
mostly ask "what will be on the exam?"), hence few undergrads go to
grad school.  Furthermore the ones that do go to grad school have a
very standard of what they see as being "influential."

And then the slightly defeating part happens.  Eventually I think
every grad student must face the point when they realize that while
the books are very written and lay out a beautiful story, this is not
how research actually happens.  Is this disingenuous?  Do we set a
false standard for the scientific process involved in research?
*Completely*.  Furthermore, the things written down in books, the
things that form the basis of the best hopes and dreams of many
incoming grad students, are *only the best ideas*!

Most ideas suck.  Unfortunately even smart people have bad ideas, or
(worse) no ideas.  To perhaps exacerbate the problem, when reading
papers about ideas that suck, the papers are generally packaged in a
veneer of theory that serves to make them *appear* somewhat well
reasoned.  (In fact, perhaps some of the best idea lack much
theoretical basis, and some of the worst ideas are explained with much
fanfare of definitions, semantics, and theorems.)  Because of this,
grad students feel a fair amount of pressure by their peers to be
geniuses.  In reality, very few people are geniuses (I'm confident
there are four or five grad students tucked away somewhere that are
quite content and have complete confidence in their abilities to solve
the world's toughest problems, but this is not the norm), as a
consequence it's easy to feel somewhat unfit for grad school.

It's also easy to compare yourself to seminal work in your area and
wonder why you can't compare.  Every area has those "top" researchers
that consistently produce amazing work, and it's easy to wonder if
you'll ever be standing up on the podium presenting your findings to
the whole field at a top conference.  (And perhaps a little scared
that you're probably going to be questioned by "those" people.)  How
will you turn your current idea into a top paper?  How will what
*you're* doing have an impact in the field?  Will anyone care?

As an undergraduate, there's a very immediate sense of return on the
investment you put into your education: study an arbitrarily defined
set of material, make a high score on an assignment, and you've won
the game.  Do this repetitively and you beat the game of college.
This isn't to say that this practice fails to produce good students.
Our undergraduates at UMD are quite smart, and generally go on to do
great things afterward.  However, the payoff in graduate school is
much less clear or immediate: you might easily work for a year on a
project that ends up completely useless.  You never have any feedback
on your performance, there is no exam that covers exactly the kind of
research you are supposed to be doing.  

(Of course, all schools will have qualifiers, written and oral, but
these don't provide the kinds of satisfaction that you're really doing
something useful, most simply serve to intimidate grad students and
instill in them the fear that they might suddenly lose all their
funding, be forced to break their lease, move back in with their
parents as a washed out twenty something with no real job prospects,
eventually ending up as the subject of an independent film where they
find their one true love after giving up the finer points of graduate
life, moving to the eastern shore and working in a bookshop before
getting back into academia and proving the next big theorem.
Frequently these films have soundtracks composed of people [Iron &
Wine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron_%26_Wine) or [Bon
Iver](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bon_Iver) and an untraditionally
cute love interest who herself comes from a standard upbringing and
decided to drop out of medical school to pursue her interest in
algebraic topology.)

While being a grad student comes with many pressures, I will say that
the ones I know are generally much happier than the horror stories I
read online about going to grad school, and I would still recommend it
to those looking to continue their education in a research context.
By contrast, graduate life offers many benefits that undergrads do
_not_ enjoy: you can typically (unless your research involves
supervised lab work) work set your own hours (which should be all the
time anyway), have a reduced set of pressures from classes, and feel
free to pursue interesting ideas (as long as they fall within the
confines of what you can get funding for or get published, probably
the hardest part).  You also feel a lot closer connection to faculty.
While as an undergrad you see faculty as deities, graduate school
allows you the opportunity to specialize to same degree that many
faculty have attained in their various areas.
