--
title: On being smart, and being lazy
tags: blog,life
--

Full disclosure, you probably shouldn't read this if you're hoping for
deep technical insights, this is mostly random musing.  But in the
next few weeks I hope to have both posts on higher order intents
(messages for Android) and writing compilers for functional langauges
(as I spend more time thinking about this in preparing a small amount
of lecture material for my advisor's class, promise I won't go
overboard, Jeff!)  The last few weeks have been pretty busy, in a
frustrating sort of way.  One thing that I sort of miss from my
undergrad days were the ability to really focus on learning material
in my classes, doing great on exams, and feeling satisfied or
fulfilled in my life.  I haven't been able to do this lately, and I
tried to think about what was causing the issue.

At some level I knew that being an undergrad was defined by an
arbitrary measure of success.  What do I mean?  Well, as an undergrad,
your main job is to get great grades, which usually includes some
extent of understanding the material.  But the system is *rigged*.
There is no way to fail.  It's not like you start working on proofs
for your homework, then get to a point where you realize the problem
statement was complete crap and you were wrong from the beginning.  If
you have an assignment, it (usually) has an answer, or at least
(nominally) has a sound motivation.

This isn't really such the case in research, there's still a lot of
stuff I want to understand, and you can't really apply the same
techniques of your undergraduate career to solve these problems.  As
such I'd got a little out of touch with the undergrad studying
mindset.  This would be fine, except I've also been taking a grad
class in math.  This is a course I *should* do well in, I've
encountered all the material before, and I've even done the proofs at
some point!  But still, I had problems getting good grades in the
class, and I had to think for a long time why this was.

The first thing I thought about was why I didn't feel motivated to
learn the material.  The subject is mathematical logic (first order).
I studied the material before, but when studying it the material was
*constantly* being reinforced by practical examples, I was writing
automated theorem provers.  If I didn't learn the material, it meant
that I couldn't make progress in my work!  By contrast, when I
approached the material this time, I approached it with a disconnected
mindset, mindlessly copying down proofs, reading problems at a
symbolic level (rather than thinking about their motivation or
meaning).  As a consequence, I wasn't really interested in the
material, and I never really forced myself to sit down and study the
material.  So of course, I am doing not so great in the class.  This
isn't so bad, I can get any passing grade without it counting against
me.  But I do really respect the material in the class, and I want my
behavior in my assignments to reflect that.  By contrast, I definitely
take *some* classes which are completely vapid fluff, they have no
right in being able to count toward my degree (luckily, I do not take
many of these at UMD).

So I restructured my study patterns for logic.  I now make a conscious
effort to sit down with the material, copy it down, and think about it
(the only way I really learn difficult material).  Additionally, I
write up examples, work extra exercises, and start my homework
earlier.  This is something I could have done all along, rather than
goofing off and watching an X files episode at 2AM that one Thursday,
I could have been reading up on material.  But I wasn't!  Why?  Well,
to be completely honest, I haven't had any classes in computer science
in a while.  Most of my classes are somewhat difficult, but at some
level I know that it's all just number crunching behind the scenes,
and I feel confident if I sat down and worked it out, I could.

But instead, I've been sort of arrogant, and somewhat complacent about
being able to do well in classes.  This was somewhat influenced by
undergrad culture.  My first semester as an undergrad, I was
constantly studying, I did amazingly in classes.  And then I started
noticing a trend: the "cool" thing to do was to try as little as
possible and still get a good (but not perfect) grade.  As I adapted
to college life, this became the natural position in which you sort of
fell.  But I'm supposed to be a slightly bigger boy now, suddenly
working really hard and taking nothing for granted is the cool thing
to do!  Why?  Because the problem motivations aren't set up for
success, most of them don't make sense at all, most of them are
completely wrong.  And to be honest, I'm not really all that smart,
I've just read about my individual research a hell of a lot (since I
was twelve or so).  As such, I've disturbingly started being scared of
things I don't really understand, only being able to go one
incremental delta beyond what I know.  


But this isn't good!  As an academic type, you're supposed to
constantly be confronting things you don't have any idea about!  In
fact, this is frequently cited as the one thing that keeps grad school
interesting and frustrating.  You're supposed to go take an
incomprehensible paper or book to a coffee shop, sit down, feel
frustrated by it, give up for a few seconds, get some coffee and walk
down the street (walking by the super hungover kids with holes in
their pants wearing the sunglasses even though it's quite overcast).
Then you're supposed to go in another little shop, sit down, and try
again.  You do this, again and again, slowly refining your knowledge
of the material, and this is how you learn.

Most people who appear smart, who appear quick, who know material,
seem to be genius, pull it out of thin air, are in fact, just reciting
"compiled" knowledge.  We take complicated concepts, run through them
over and over in our minds, work out the minute details, learn the
tricks, and store our uniquely compact representation of this material
in our mind, ready to recite it in our mind.  For other things, we
read about them to the point we're convinced that we *could* figure
out the details if given sufficient time, convincing ourselves that
there is nothing new here, that we can in good conscious talk to
others about it without feeling we're cheating them about our
knowledge.  (Or perhaps more pragmatically, that we know enough
connecting points so that we can get the main ideas across enough to
make progress in our conversation.)

This morning I took an exam on logic, there were some simple concepts
and proofs that I left incomplete, I'm extremely certain that if I had
behaved appropriately and studied, I would have been able to rattle
these off the top of my head immediately.  By contrast, my labmate
asked me a fairly complicated interview question, I was able to give
the answer in less than twenty seconds along with producing a proof as
to the algorithm's correctness.  Was this because I'm a computer
genius and know any algorithm solution ever?  No, it's because I've
been doing this stuff since before I thought kissing a girl wasn't
completely gross.
